# UTMOS

<details>
<summary>基本信息</summary>

- 标题: "UTMOS: UTokyo-SaruLab System for VoiceMOS Challenge 2022"
- 作者:
  - 01 Takaaki Saeki (The University of Tokyo) takaaki_saeki@ipc.i.u-tokyo.ac.jp
  - 02 Detai Xin (The University of Tokyo) detai_xin@ipc.i.u-tokyo.ac.jp
  - 03 Wataru Nakata (The University of Tokyo) nakata-wataru855@general.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp
  - 04 Tomoki Koriyama (The University of Tokyo)
  - 05 Shinnosuke Takamichi (The University of Tokyo)
  - 06 Hiroshi Saruwatari (The University of Tokyo)
- 链接:
  - [ArXiv](https://arxiv.org/abs/2204.02152)
  - [Publication](https://doi.org/10.21437/Interspeech.2022-439)
  - [Github](https://github.com/sarulab-speech/UTMOS22)
  - [Demo]
- 文件:
  - [ArXiv](_PDF/2204.02152v2__UTMOS__UTokyo-SaruLab_System_for_VoiceMOS_Challenge_2022.pdf)
  - [Publication](_PDF/2204.02152p0__UTMOS__InterSpeech2022.pdf)

</details>

## Abstract: 摘要

<details>
<summary>展开原文</summary>

We present the ***UTokyo-SaruLab mean opinion score (MOS)*** prediction system submitted to VoiceMOS Challenge 2022.
The challenge is to predict the MOS values of speech samples collected from previous Blizzard Challenges and Voice Conversion Challenges for two tracks: a main track for in-domain prediction and an out-of-domain (OOD) track for which there is less labeled data from different listening tests.
Our system is based on ensemble learning of strong and weak learners.
Strong learners incorporate several improvements to the previous fine-tuning models of self-supervised learning (SSL) models, while weak learners use basic machine-learning methods to predict scores from SSL features.
In the Challenge, our system had the highest score on several metrics for both the main and OOD tracks.
In addition, we conducted ablation studies to investigate the effectiveness of our proposed methods.

</details>
<br>

我们介绍了提交给 VoiceMOS Challenge 2022 的 ***UTokyo-SaruLab 平均意见得分 (MOS) 预测系统***.
该挑战的目的是预测收集自之前的 Blizzard Challenges 和 Voice Conversion Challenges 的语音样本的平均意见得分值, 分为两个赛道: 用于域内预测的主赛道和域外 (OOD) 赛道, 后者有着较少来自不同听力测试的标注数据.

我们的系统基于强学习器和弱学习器的集成学习.
强学习器将几项改进整合到之前微调过的自监督模型中, 而弱学习器则使用基础的机器学习方法来根据自监督特征预测得分.

在挑战中, 我们的系统在主赛道和 OOD 赛道上的多个指标都达到了最高分.
此外, 我们还进行了消融实验来评估我们提出的方法的有效性.

## 1.Introduction: 引言

Although subjective evaluation has been the gold standard in the field of speech synthesis~\cite{black05blizzard}, its high cost in terms of time and money motivates us to develop measures for automatically determining the performance.
Although a number of neural network-based approaches for doing this have been proposed~\cite{patton16automos,lo2019mosnet,Leng2021MBNETMP}, there are still many challenges, such as developing a general-purpose prediction model.

The VoiceMOS Challenge~\cite{huang21voicemos}, which was launched this year, provides the common database and baseline systems.
The database contains synthetic speech samples and the corresponding mean opinion scores (MOS) on a five-point scale as assigned by human evaluators.
The participants construct a prediction system and submit the system's predicted MOS for the test data.
There are two tracks in the challenge, the main and out-of-domain (OOD) tracks, and the system performance is evaluated using several metrics.

In this paper, we present our MOS prediction system, ***UTMOS*** (pronounced "u--t--mos"), which we submitted to VoiceMOS Challenge 2022.
Our system is based on ensemble learning of strong and weak learners: the strong learners are obtained by fine-tuning models of self-supervised learning (SSL) models, and the weak learners predict scores from SSL features by using non-neural-network machine-learning methods from SSL features.
The strong learner incorporates several improvement functions, including contrastive learning, listener dependency, and phoneme encoding.
We also present the results of VoiceMOS Challenge 2022 and those of our ablation studies.
Our implementation is publicly available at [Github](https://github.com/sarulab-speech/UTMOS22).
This paper makes three contributions in particular:
- It describes and MOS prediction system that had the highest score on several metrics in the main and OOD tracks of VoiceMOS Challenge 2022.
- It presents proposed methods for predicting MOS that include contrastive learning and phoneme encoding.
- It presents the results of ablation studies demonstrating the effectiveness of listener-dependent learning and that of stacking by increasing the number of strong learners.

## 2.Related Works: 相关工作

## 3.Methodology: 方法

## 4.Experiments: 实验

## 5.Results: 结果

## 6.Conclusions: 结论

<details>
<summary>展开原文</summary>

We presented the system we submitted to VoiceMOS Challenge 2022.
Our system is based on ensemble learning of strong learners, which are obtained by fine-tuning SSL models, and weak learners that predict scores from SSL features.
Future work includes constructing a larger-scale general-purpose MOS prediction model by collecting a wider variety of data.

</details>
<br>

我们展示了我们提交给 VoiceMOS Challenge 2022 的系统.
我们的系统基于集成学习, 强学习器通过微调自监督模型获得, 而弱学习器则从自监督特征中预测得分.
未来工作将包括收集更多不同类型数据来构建更大规模的通用 MOS 预测模型.