# Section 01: Introduction

Since the late 1950s, computer-based text-to-speech systems (TTS) have undergone significant advancements, culminating in the production of models that generate speech almost indistinguishable from that of a human. This progress has followed a path consisting of several stages, beginning with conventional methods named as concatenative synthesis and progressing to more advanced approaches known as **Statistical Parametric Speech Synthesis (SPSS)**. Advanced approaches are mainly based on machine learning algorithms like <algo>hidden Markov models (HMMs)</algo> and <algo>gaussian mixture models (GMMs)</algo>. Despite this progress, speech generated by these methods was still noticeably artificial. However, the emergence of deep learning (DL) as a new branch under machine learning (ML) in 2006 has led to significant improvements. Speech synthesis researchers,like many in other research fields, started incorporating deep neural networks (DNN) in their models. Initially,DNNs replaced HMMs and GMMs in SPSS models while the main structure still follows the primary framework of SPSS models as shown in Fig. 1. As discussed in **"Statistical Parametric Speech Synthesis Using Deep Neural Networks"**, the deep learning-based models have overcome many limitations and problems associated with machine learning-based models.

Researchers continue to aim for improved speech quality and more human-like speech despite past advancements. Additionally, they seek to simplify the framework of the text-to-speech models due to the intricate nature of the SPSS structure, which limits progress in this field to those with extensive linguistic knowledge and expertise. Deep learning advancements have brought about the simple encoder-decoder structure for TTS models as <algo>sequence-to-sequence (Seq2Seq)</algo> approaches. The pro-posed approaches have simplified the structure of conventional TTS with multiple components into training a single network that converts a set of input text characters/phonemes into a set of acoustic features (mel-spectrograms). A main concern in these advanced TTS models is the mapping process between the input and output sequences, which is a one-to-many problem, as the single input text can have multiple speech variations as output. In fact, there are two groups of recent TTS models, as shown in Fig.02. The first group generates mel-spectrograms in a sequential (autoregressive) manner using soft and automatic attention alignments between input and output sequences, such as the Tacotron model ([Tacotron (2017)](../../Models/TTS2_Acoustic/2017.03.29_Tacotron.md) [Tacotron2 (2017)](../../Models/TTS2_Acoustic/2017.12.16_Tacotron2.md)). The second group utilizes hard alignments between the phonemes/characters and mel-spectro-grams, and thus its speech generation process is parallel(non-autoregressive), as in the FastSpeech model ([FastSpeech (2019)](../../Models/TTS2_Acoustic/2019.05.22_FastSpeech.md) [FastSpeech2](../../Models/TTS2_Acoustic/2020.06.08_FastSpeech2.md)).This improvement in the structure of the TTS model has encouraged rapid development in the field within the last few years, during which the proposed models produced speech that is nearly indistinguishable from human speech.

Human speech is highly expressive and reflects various factors, such as the speaker’s identity, emotion, and speaking style. In addition, there are many applications in which speech synthesis can be utilized, especially expressive speech synthesis. For instance, audiobooks and podcast applications that create audio versions of eBooks and podcasts, translation applications which provide real-time translation of foreign language text, dubbing applications that generate an alternative audio track for a video with different content, speaker, or language, and content creation applications which help produce audio versions of textual content, such as blogs and news articles. E-learning applications that allow for adding voice-over audio to e-learning courses, and conversational AI applications enable machines to communicate with users in a human-like manner, such as AI chatbots and virtual assistants.

As spoken language is a crucial component in such applications, users must feel as if they are communicating with a real human rather than a machine. Therefore, the speech generated by these applications should convey appropriate emotion, intonation, stress, and speaking style to match the ongoing conversation or the content type and context of the text being read.

As a result, there has been a recent attention towards building efficient expressive speech synthesis models as another step forward in achieving human-like speech. Therefore, many studies have been devoted to expressive speech synthesis (ETTS) as a hot research area, particularly over the last 5 years. In this work, we present the findings of our systematic literature review on ETTS field from the past 5 years. Firstly, we suggest a classification schema of deep learning-based ETTS models that are proposed during this period, based on structures,and learning methods followed in each study. A summary is then provided for each category in the classification schema and main papers related to this category. After that, we outline the main challenges in the ETTS area and solutions that have been proposed to solve them from literature. Finally, we conclude with a discussion of the implications of our work and a highlight of some gaps that require further research in this area.

During our work on this review of expressive speech synthesis literature, we came across several review papers that focus on different stages of development in the speech synthesis field. The majority of these reviews concentrate on DL-based TTS approaches, while only a few papers cover recent TTS approaches in addition to early conventional ones. However, to the best of our knowledge, there are no review papers that cover the fast growth in the (expressive) speech synthesis area, especially in the last few years. Therefore, our main goal in this review is to provide an overview of research trends, techniques, and challenges in this area during this period. We hope that our work will offer researchers a comprehensive understanding of how and what has been accomplished in this field and the gaps that need to be filled as guidance for their future efforts.

While we were writing this paper, we came across an interesting recent review paper **"An Overview of Affective Speech Synthesis and Conversion in the Deep Learning Era"** that is similar to our work. However, the review covers emotional speech synthesis (ESS) as a sub-field of voice transformation while our work is more comprehensive as a systematic literature review that discusses approaches,challenges, and resources. Furthermore, the taxonomy we provide for the reviewed approaches differs from the one given in as elaborated in the next section.

The remaining sections of this paper are structured as follows: Section 2 provides an explanation of the methodology employed for conducting this review. Sections 3and 4 describe the different main and sub-categories of the proposed classification schema for DL-based expressive TTS models. Main challenges facing ETTS models and how they have been tackled in the literature are covered in Section 5. We then give a brief description of ETTS datasets and applied evaluation metrics in Sections 6 and 7, respectively. Finally, Section 8 concludes the paper.
