# TF-Codec

<details>
<summary>基本信息</summary>

- 标题: "Latent-Domain Predictive Neural Speech Coding"
- 作者:
  - 01 Xue Jiang,
  - 02 Xiulian Peng,
  - 03 Huaying Xue,
  - 04 Yuan Zhang,
  - 05 Yan Lu
- 链接:
  - [ArXiv](https://arxiv.org/abs/2207.08363)
  - [Publication](https://doi.org/10.1109/TASLP.2023.3277693)
  - [Github]()
  - [Demo]()
- 文件:
  - [ArXiv](_PDF/2207.08363v2__TF-Codec__Latent-Domain_Predictive_Neural_Speech_Coding.pdf)
  - [Publication](_PDF/2207.08363p0__TF-Codec__TASLP2023.pdf)

</details>

## Abstract: 摘要

Neural audio/speech coding has recently demonstrated its capability to deliver high quality at much lower bitrates than traditional methods.
However, existing neural audio/speech codecs employ either acoustic features or learned blind features with a convolutional neural network for encoding, by which there are still temporal redundancies within encoded features.
This paper introduces latent-domain predictive coding into the VQ-VAE framework to fully remove such redundancies and proposes the TF-Codec for low-latency neural speech coding in an end-to-end manner.
Specifically, the extracted features are encoded conditioned on a prediction from past quantized latent frames so that temporal correlations are further removed.
Moreover, we introduce a learnable compression on the time-frequency input to adaptively adjust the attention paid to main frequencies and details at different bitrates.
A differentiable vector quantization scheme based on distance-to-soft mapping and Gumbel-Softmax is proposed to better model the latent distributions with rate constraint.
Subjective results on multilingual speech datasets show that, with low latency, the proposed TF-Codec at 1 kbps achieves significantly better quality than Opus at 9 kbps, and TF-Codec at 3 kbps outperforms both EVS at 9.6 kbps and Opus at 12 kbps.
Numerous studies are conducted to demonstrate the effectiveness of these techniques.

## 1·Introduction: 引言

## 2·Related Works: 相关工作

## 3·Methodology: 方法

## 4·Experiments: 实验

## 5·Results: 结果

## 6·Conclusions: 结论