# SpeechAlign

<details>
<summary>基本信息</summary>

- 标题: "SpeechAlign: Aligning Speech Generation to Human Preferences"
- 作者:
  - 01 Dong Zhang,
  - 02 Zhaowei Li,
  - 03 Shimin Li,
  - 04 Xin Zhang,
  - 05 Pengyu Wang,
  - 06 Yaqian Zhou,
  - 07 Xipeng Qiu
- 链接:
  - [ArXiv](https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.05600)
  - [Publication]()
  - [Github](https://github.com/0nutation/SpeechGPT)
  - [Demo](https://0nutation.github.io/SpeechAlign.github.io/)
- 文件:
  - [ArXiv](_PDF/2404.05600v1__SpeechAlign__Aligning_Speech_Generation_to_Human_Preferences.pdf)
  - [Publication] #TODO

</details>

## Abstract: 摘要

Speech language models have significantly advanced in generating realistic speech, with neural codec language models standing out.
However, the integration of human feedback to align speech outputs to human preferences is often neglected.
This paper addresses this gap by first analyzing the distribution gap in codec language models, highlighting how it leads to discrepancies between the training and inference phases, which negatively affects performance.
Then we explore leveraging learning from human feedback to bridge the distribution gap.
We introduce ***SpeechAlign***, an iterative self-improvement strategy that aligns speech language models to human preferences.
***SpeechAlign*** involves constructing a preference codec dataset contrasting golden codec tokens against synthetic tokens, followed by preference optimization to improve the codec language model.
This cycle of improvement is carried out iteratively to steadily convert weak models to strong ones.
Through both subjective and objective evaluations, we show that ***SpeechAlign*** can bridge the distribution gap and facilitating continuous self-improvement of the speech language model.
Moreover, ***SpeechAlign*** exhibits robust generalization capabilities and works for smaller models.
Code and models will be available at [this https URL](https://github.com/0nutation/SpeechGPT).

## 1·Introduction: 引言

## 2·Related Works: 相关工作

## 3·Methodology: 方法

## 4·Experiments: 实验

## 5·Results: 结果

## 6·Conclusions: 结论