# LibriTTS

<details>
<summary>基本信息</summary>

- 标题: LibriTTS: A Corpus Derived from LibriSpeech for Text-to-Speech
- 作者:
  - 01 [Heiga Zen](../Authors/Heiga_Zen.md)
  - 02 [Viet Dang](../Authors/Viet_Dang.md)
  - 03 [Rob Clark](../Authors/Rob_Clark.md)
  - 04 [Yu Zhang](../Authors/Yu_Zhang.md)
  - 05 [Ron J. Weiss](../Authors/Ron_J_Weiss.md)
  - 06 [Ye Jia](../Authors/Ye_Jia.md)
  - 07 [Zhifeng Chen](../Authors/Zhifeng_Chen.md)
  - 08 [Yonghui Wu](../Authors/Yonghui_Wu.md)
- 机构:
  - [Google](../Institutions/Google.md)
- 时间:
  - 预印时间: 2019.04.05 ArXiv v1
  - 更新笔记: 2024.07.10
- 发表:
  - [InterSpeech 2019](../Publications/InterSpeech.md)
- 链接:
  - [ArXiv](https://arxiv.org/abs/1904.02882)
  - [DOI](https://doi.org/10.21437/Interspeech.2019-2441)
  - [OpenSLR](https://www.openslr.org/60/)
  - [Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar?cluster=2687491316639568904)
- 标签:
  - [数据集](../Tags/Dataset.md)
- 页数: 5
- 引用: 46
- 被引: 768
- 数据:
  - [LibriSpeech](LibriSpeech.md)
- 对比:
  - ?
- 复现:
  - ?

</details>

## Abstract: 摘要

<details>
<summary>原文</summary>

> This paper introduces a new speech corpus called ***LibriTTS*** designed for text-to-speech use.
> It is derived from the original audio and text materials of the [LibriSpeech](LibriSpeech.md) corpus, which has been used for training and evaluating automatic speech recognition systems.
> The new corpus inherits desired properties of the [LibriSpeech](LibriSpeech.md) corpus while addressing a number of issues which make [LibriSpeech](LibriSpeech.md) less than ideal for text-to-speech work.
> 
> The released corpus consists of 585 hours of speech data at 24kHz sampling rate from 2,456 speakers and the corresponding texts.
> Experimental results show that neural end-to-end TTS models trained from the ***LibriTTS*** corpus achieved above 4.0 in mean opinion scores in naturalness in five out of six evaluation speakers.
> The corpus is freely available for download from http://www.openslr.org/60/

</details>
<br>

本文介绍一个名为 ***LibriTTS*** 的新语音语料库, 专为文本转语音应用设计.
该语料库源自 [LibriSpeech](LibriSpeech.md) 语料库的原始音频和文本材料, 该语料库已经被用于训练和评估自动语音识别 (ASR) 系统.
新语料库继承了 [LibriSpeech](LibriSpeech.md) 语料库的一些所需特性, 同时也解决了该语料库在文本转语音应用中的一些问题.

发布的语料库包含来自 2,456 位说话人的 585 小时, 采样率为 24kHz 的语音数据, 以及相应的文本.
实验结果表明, 基于 ***LibriTTS*** 语料库训练的神经端到端 TTS 模型在六位评估说话人的五位的平均意见得分 (MOS) 超过 4.0.
该语料库可以从 http://www.openslr.org/60/ 免费下载.

| 子集 | 小时数 | 女说话人 | 男说话人 | 说话人总数 | 压缩包大小 |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|dev-clean       | 8.97   |  20      | 20       | 40 | 1.2 GB |
|test-clean      | 8.56   |  19      | 20       | 39 | 1.2 GB |
|dev-other       | 6.43   |  16      | 17       | 33 | 924 MB |
|test-other      | 6.69   |  17      | 16       | 33 | 964 MB |
|train-clean-100 | 53.78  |  123     | 124      | 247 | 7.7 GB |
|train-clean-360 | 191.29 |  430     | 474      | 904 | 27 GB |
|train-other-500 | 310.08 |  560     | 600      | 1,160 | 44 GB |
|Total           | 585.80 |  1,185   | 1,271    | 2,456 | --- |


## 1.Introduction: 引言

> The introduction of deep learning-based, neural end-to-end approaches has lowered the barrier to develop high-quality text-to-speech (TTS) systems.
> With a sufficient amount of studio-quality recorded speech data from a single professional speaker, one can train a generative neural end-to-end TTS model capable of synthesizing speech in a reading style almost as natural as the training speaker.
> Thus, the focus of TTS research is shifting toward more challenging tasks, such as creating multi-speaker TTS systems, building neural end-to-end TTS systems from small amounts of data, utilizing a small amount of data for voice adaptation, investigating unsupervised prosody and speaking style modeling, and building TTS voices from noisy found data.
>
> The LibriSpeech corpus is derived from audiobooks that are part of the LibriVox project.
> There are 982 hours of speech data from 2,484 speakers in this corpus.
> It is designed to be reasonably balanced in terms of gender and per-speaker duration.
> Furthermore, as it is released under a non-restrictive license, it can be used for both non-commercial and commercial purposes.
> Although this corpus was originally designed for automatic speech recognition (ASR) research, it has been used in various text-to-speech (TTS) research projects thanks to its attractive properties, such as a non-restrictive license, a large amount of data, and wide speaker diversity.
> 
> However, it also has a number of undesired properties when considering its use for TTS .
> The properties which are addressed in this paper are as follows:
>
> - The audio files are at 16 kHz sampling rate; 16 kHz sampling is high enough for the ASR purpose but too low to achieve high quality TTS.  Modern production-quality TTS systems often use 24, 32, 44.1, or 48 kHz sampling rate.
> - The speech is split at silence intervals; the training data speech is split at silences longer than 0.3 seconds.   To learn long-term characteristics of speech such as the sentence-level prosody for given a text, it is necessary to split speech only at sentence breaks.
> - All letters are normalized into uppercase, and all punctuation is removed; capitalization and punctuation marks are useful features to learn prosodic characteristics such as emphasis and the length of pauses.
> - The position of sentences within paragraphs is discarded; to learn inter-sentence prosody it is desirable to access neighbouring sentence text or audio, but this information is missing.
> - Some audio files contain significant background noise even within its `clean` subsets; in the LibriSpeech corpus, speakers with low word error rates (WERs) using the Wall Street Journal (WSJ) acoustic model were designated as `clean`.  Therefore, the `clean` subset can contain noisy samples.
>
> To address these undesired properties while keeping the desired properties (unrestricted license, large speaker inventories, and gender balance) of the LibriSpeech corpus as much as possible, this paper introduces a new corpus called ***LibriTTS***.
> The ***LibriTTS*** corpus is derived from the original materials (MP3 from LibriVox and texts from Project Gutenberg) of the LibriSpeech corpus and is distributed under the same non-restrictive license.
> It has the same speakers and subset split as the LibriSpeech corpus, offering similar gender balance.
> The above-mentioned undesired properties in the LibriSpeech corpus are also addressed:
>
> - The audio files are at 24kHz sampling rate; as most of the original material is recorded at 44.1 or 32kHz sampling rate, all audio with a sampling rate of less than 24kHz were excluded (two 16kHz files and six 22.05kHz files).
> - The speech is split at sentence breaks; book-level texts are split into sentences using Google's proprietary sentence splitting engine then the audio was split at these sentence boundaries.
> - Both original and normalized texts are included; the text has been normalized using Google's proprietary text normalization engine. 
> - Contextual information (e.g., neighbouring sentences) can also be extracted; additional text files provide easy access to neighbouring sentences. 
> - Utterances with significant background noise are excluded; utterance-level signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) is estimated and used to filter out noisy utterances. 
>
> The rest of this paper is organized as follows.
> Section \ref{sec:datasets} summarizes existing corpora used for TTS research. 
> Section \ref{sec:pipeline} describes the data processing pipeline used to produce the ***LibriTTS*** corpus from the original materials.
> Section \ref{sec:statistics} presents overall statistics of the corpus.
> Section \ref{sec:experiment} shows the experimental results of building TTS models with this corpus.
> Concluding remarks are given in the final section.

## 2.Related Works: 相关工作

> Having appropriate data facilitates exploration of new tasks and research ideas.
> Table~\ref{tab:datasets} lists publicly available English speech corpora which are used in recent TTS research papers.
>
> The CMU ARCTIC corpus has been used for many years in statistical parametric speech synthesis research.
> However, it is too small to train neural end-to-end TTS models.
> The VCTK corpus is popular for experimenting with multi-speaker TTS as it contains studio quality speech data from multiple speakers.
> The Blizzard Challenge 2011 (BC2011) corpora provides a relatively large amount of reading speech from a single professional speaker.
> It is distributed under a non-commercial license.
> The [LJSpeech](LJSpeech.md), M-AILABS, and Blizzard Challenge 2013 (BC2013) corpora include tens of hours of audio and text from audiobooks read by single speakers.
> The LJspeech and M-AILABS corpora are comprised of non-professional audiobooks from the LibriVox project  and distributed under a non-restrictive license, whereas the BC2013 is read by a professional speaker but distributed under a non-commercial license like BC2011.
> As they are audiobook recordings, they contain expressive lines and a wide range of prosodic variation.
> They are often used for building single-speaker TTS voices.

## 3.Methodology: 方法

> We align the long-form audio recordings with the corresponding texts, and split them into sentence-level segments.  
> We also need to exclude utterances with audio/text mismatches which can be caused by inaccuracies in the text, reader-introduced insertions, deletions, substitutions, and transpositions, disfluencies, and text normalization errors.
> This section describes the pipeline which we developed to produce the ***LibriTTS*** corpus.

### 3.1.Text Pre-Processing: 文本预处理

> The first step in the pipeline is to split the book-level text into paragraphs/sentences and perform text normalization.
> 1. Book-level texts are first split into paragraphs at consecutive newlines.
> 2. Each paragraph text is further split into sentences by the proprietary sentence splitter.
> 3. Non-standard words (e.g., abbreviations, numbers and currency expressions) and semiotic classes (text tokens and token sequences that represent particular entities that are semantically constrained, such as measure phrases, addresses and dates) in the sentences are detected and normalized by a **weighted finite state transducer (WFST)**-based text normalizer.

### 3.2.Extracting Multi-Paragraph Text: 提取多段文本

> In the original, unprocessed audio and text materials released from the LibriSpeech site, each audiobook consists of chapter-level audio files (in 128kbps MP3 format) whereas each text is a single file of the entire book.
> The second step in the pipeline extracts the partial text corresponding to each chapter-level audio file.
> - Run ASR (Google Cloud Speech-to-Text API) on the chapter-level audio and get its transcription.
> - Extract chapter-level text from the book-level text by matching the transcription with the book-level text.

### 3.3.Align the Audio and Text: 对齐音频和文本

> The third step is to align the audio with the extracted text. 
> This is done by the engine used for YouTube's `auto-sync` feature.
> This feature allows video owners to upload a simple text transcript of the spoken content of a video as an alternative to automatically-created closed captions from ASR.
> Auto-sync is also used to generate data for ASR acoustic model training. Here we used a modified version of Auto-sync to generate the ***LibriTTS*** corpus.
> The uploaded transcript, containing no timing information, is force-aligned (`auto-synced`) using standard ASR algorithms to generate start and end times of each word.
>
> 1. A miniature tri-gram language model (LM) is generated using only the concatenated normalized sentences.
> 2. The audio is recognized using a decoder graph derived from the mini-LM in combination with a bidirectional long short-term memory (LSTM)-based acoustic model.
> 3. The decoding result is then edit-distance aligned to the normalized sentences. A sentence is marked as `aligned` if all words are matching (with edit-distance of zero).
> 4. Then start and end times for the sentences are generated from the decoding result. 

### 3.4.Post Processing: 后处理

> The final step is post-processing.
> We filter out possibly problematic lines based on heuristics found with other corpora and perform normalization.
>
> - Filter out sentences with more than 71 words, which are likely to be affected by sentence splitting errors.
> - Filter out utterances with a large average word duration, which is possibly the result of severe audio/text mismatch.
> - Normalize the polarity of audio by flipping up-side-down waveforms by ensuring DC offsets are positive. 
> - Run a silence end-pointer to remove long start and end silences.
> - Compute SNR of the audio using waveform amplitude distribution analysis (WADA). 
> Audio with WADA-SNR $<20$dB and $<0$dB are filtered out from the `clean` and `other` subsets, respectively. 
>
> After the post-processing step, pairs of audio and texts (original and normalized) are generated to form the final corpus.
> The next section describes the statistics of the generated corpus.

## 4.Experiments: 实验

### Statistics: 统计数据

> Table~\ref{tab:summary} provides a summary of all subsets in the LibriTTS corpus.
> The amount of yielded audio was significantly lower than that of the LibriSpeech corpus (about 60\%).
> This is due to 1) stricter requirement in the alignment step (all words in a sentence must have confidence one) and 2) SNR-based filtering.
> Table~\ref{tab:filtering} shows the numbers of sentences in the original partial text, filtered sentences, and the final output.
> It can be seen from the table that about 25\% of sentences were filtered via the SNR threshold (20dB) for the `clean` subset.
> As the SNR threshold for the ``other'' subset is lower (0dB), the number of filtered sentences is less significant.
>
> Figure~\ref{fig:histograms_num_chars_words} shows violin plots of the number of character per sentence in the LibriSpeech and LibriTTS corpora and that of the original LibriVox materials.
> It can be seen from the figure that the distribution of the sentence length in the LibriTTS corpus is similar to that of the original LibriVox materials, whereas that of the LibriSpeech corpus is significantly different.
> Possibly splitting speech at silence intervals rather than sentence boundaries causes this mismatch.
> Due to the heuristics to filter-out suspicious long sentences, the distribution for the LibriTTS corpus has shorter tail than that of the LibriVox materials.
>
> One side-effect of the more strict filtering applied in the LibriTTS data creation pipeline is the imbalance in terms of per-speaker duration.
> Figure~\ref{fig:histogram_audio_duration} shows violin plots of per-speaker audio duration on the LibriTTS and LibriSpeech corpora.
> It can be seen from the figure that the distribution of per-speaker audio duration on the LibriSpeech corpus has a sharp peak at its median (about 1,500 seconds).
> On the other hand, that of the LibriTTS corpus has a wider variance and lower median value (about 900 seconds).
> Furthermore, its diversity of audio length per speaker is much larger than that of the LibriSpeech corpus.

### Experimental Conditions: 实验条件

> This section presents TTS experimental results using models trained from the LibriTTS corpus to give baselines.
> 
> Gaussian mixture variational auto-encoder (GMVAE)-Tacotron models were trained from the train-clean subsets of the LibriSpeech and LibriTTS corpora.
> The sizes of the latent attribute representation (size of latent vector) and the number of latent attribute classes (the number of mixture components in the Gaussian mixture prior) were 16 and 32, respectively. 
> A speaker embedding table was used to give speaker identity conditioning.
> Each model was trained for at least 200k steps using the Adam optimizer.
> Character sequences with punctuation marks from normalized texts were used as inputs of the network.
> WaveRNN-based neural vocoders at 16kHz and 24kHz sampling rates were trained from the audio in the train-clean subsets of the LibriSpeech and LibriTTS corpora, respectively. 
> At synthesis time, first a latent attribute class of the Gaussian mixture prior was randomly selected. Second, a mean vector associated with the selected Gaussian prior was used as the latent attribute representation.
> Third, a sequence of log-mel spectrogram was predicted from the normalized input text and the latent attribute representation. 
> Finally, a speech waveform was synthesized by driving the WaveRNN neural vocoder given the sequence of log-mel spectrogram.
> Please refer to GMVAE-Tacotron for details of the hyper-parameters.
>
> Six readers (three female and three male) were selected from the train-clean subsets for evaluation.
> The female and male reader IDs were (19, 103, 1841) and (204, 1121, 5717), respectively.
> 620 evaluation sentences were randomly selected from the test subsets of the corpus.
> This set of evaluation sentences is also included in the release.
>
> Quantitative subjective evaluations relied on crowd-sourced mean opinion scores (MOS) rating the naturalness of the synthesized speech by native speakers using headphones.
> After listening to each stimulus, a subject was asked to rate the naturalness of the stimulus in a five-point Likert scale score (1: Bad, 2: Poor, 3: Fair, 4: Good, 5: Excellent) in increments of 0.5.
> Each sample was rated by a single rater.
> To evaluate the effect of sampling rate, we also down-sampled the synthesized speech samples from the LibriTTS model to 16kHz and included them as test stimulus.

## 5.Results: 结果

> Table~\ref{tab:MOS} shows the experimental results.
> It can be seen from the table that LibriTTS (24kHz) achieved the best subjective scores with all speakers.
> The gaps in MOS between LibriTTS (16kHz) and LibriTTS (24kHz) for female and male speakers were 0.175 and 0.133, respectively.
> It clearly shows the benefit of having audio at higher sampling rate.
> On the other hand, theose between LibriSpeech (16kHz) and LibriTTS (16kHz) for female and male speakers were 0.15 and -0.03, respectively.
> Although this result can suggest that preserving capitalization and punctuation marks were less important, this hypothesis is not fully confirmed as the size of the LibriTTS corpus is about half of that of LibriSpeech (245 hours vs. 460 hours).
>
> It is interesting to note that subjective scores for male speakers were significantly lower than those for female speakers; the gaps between female and male were 0.48 and 0.26 for LibriTTS (24kHz) and LibriSpeech (16kHz), respectively.
> It indicates that the current model configuration is sub-optional for male speakers (e.g., filter-bank configuration, modeling dependency of time-domain signals by WaveRNN).
> Further experiments are required to fully understand the effect of these configurations.
>
> Finally, there are still significant gap in MOS between natural and synthesized speech (0.16 for female, 0.61 for male).
> We need further work to improve the naturalness of synthesized speech on this task.

## 6.Conclusions: 结论

<details>
<summary>原文</summary>

> This paper introduced the ***LibriTTS*** corpus, which was designed for TTS use.
> It was derived from the original audio and text materials of the [LibriSpeech](LibriSpeech.md) corpus, by automatically aligning audiobooks and their texts, segmenting them into utterances, and filtering noisy transcripts and audio recordings.
> The corpus consists of 585 hours of speech data at 24kHz sampling rate from 2,456 speakers and its corresponding texts.
> To our knowledge this is the largest TTS-specific corpus.
> We demonstrated that Tacotron models trained from this corpus produced naturally sounding speech.
> This corpus is released online for public use; it is freely available for download from http://www.openslr.org/60/.
> We hope that the release of this corpus accelerates TTS research.
>
> Future work includes evaluating the impacts of speaker imbalance, preserving punctuation marks and capitalization, and the relationship between amount of training data and the naturalness of synthesized speech.
> We also plan to expand this corpus by adding more speakers and languages.

</details>
<br>

本文介绍专为文本转语音应用设计的 ***LibriTTS*** 语料库.
通过自动对齐有声书和对应文本, 分割成语句, 并过滤掉噪声转写和音频记录, 从 [LibriSpeech](LibriSpeech.md) 语料库的原始音频和文本材料中衍生而来.
该语料库包含来自 2,456 位说话人的 585 小时, 采样率为 24kHz 的语音数据, 以及相应的文本.
据我们所知, 这是目前最大的 TTS 专用语料库.
我们展示了基于该语料库训练的 Tacotron 模型生成自然流畅的语音.
本语料库已在线公开, 并可免费下载; 它可从 http://www.openslr.org/60/ 下载.
我们期待发布该语料库将促进 TTS 研究的发展.

未来的工作包括评估说话人不平衡的影响, 保留标点符号和大小写, 以及训练数据量和合成语音自然度之间的关系.
我们还计划通过增加更多说话人和语言来扩展该语料库.