# 标题

<details>
<summary>基本信息</summary>

- 标题: "Multi-band MelGAN: Faster Waveform Generation for High-Quality Text-to-Speech"
- 作者:
  - 01 Geng Yang, Shan Yang, Kai Liu, Peng Fang, Wei Chen, Lei Xie
- 链接:
  - [ArXiv](https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.05106)
  - [Publication](https://doi.org/10.1109/SLT48900.2021.9383551)
  - [Github]()
  - [Demo](http://yanggeng1995.github.io/demo)
- 文件:
  - [ArXiv](_PDF/2005.05106v2__Multi-Band_MelGAN__Faster_Waveform_Generation_for_High-Quality_TTS.pdf)
  - [Publication](_PDF/2005.05106p0__Multi-Band_MelGAN__SLT2021.pdf)

</details>

## Abstract: 摘要

In this paper, we propose multi-band MelGAN, a much faster waveform generation model targeting to high-quality text-to-speech.
Specifically, we improve the original MelGAN by the following aspects.
First, we increase the receptive field of the generator, which is proven to be beneficial to speech generation.
Second, we substitute the feature matching loss with the multi-resolution STFT loss to better measure the difference between fake and real speech.
Together with pre-training, this improvement leads to both better quality and better training stability.
More importantly, we extend MelGAN with multi-band processing: the generator takes mel-spectrograms as input and produces sub-band signals which are subsequently summed back to full-band signals as discriminator input.
The proposed multi-band MelGAN has achieved high MOS of 4.34 and 4.22 in waveform generation and TTS, respectively.
With only 1.91M parameters, our model effectively reduces the total computational complexity of the original MelGAN from 5.85 to 0.95 GFLOPS.
Our Pytorch implementation, which will be open-resourced shortly, can achieve a real-time factor of 0.03 on CPU without hardware specific optimization.

## 1·Introduction: 引言

## 2·Related Works: 相关工作

## 3·Methodology: 方法

## 4·Experiments: 实验

## 5·Results: 结果

## 6·Conclusions: 结论