# WaveGrad2

<details>
<summary>基本信息</summary>

- 标题: "WaveGrad 2: Iterative Refinement for Text-to-Speech Synthesis"
- 作者:
  - 01 Nanxin Chen,
  - 02 Yu Zhang,
  - 03 Heiga Zen,
  - 04 Ron J. Weiss,
  - 05 Mohammad Norouzi,
  - 06 Najim Dehak,
  - 07 William Chan
- 链接:
  - [ArXiv](https://arxiv.org/abs/2106.09660)
  - [Publication](https://doi.org/10.21437/Interspeech.2021-1897)
  - [Github]()
  - [Demo](https://wavegrad.github.io/v2)
- 文件:
  - [ArXiv](_PDF/2106.09660v2__WaveGrad2__Iterative_Refinement_for_Text-to-Speech_Synthesis.pdf)
  - [Publication](_PDF/2106.09660p0__WaveGrad2__InterSpeech2021.pdf)

</details>

## Abstract: 摘要

<table><tr><td width="50%">

This paper introduces WaveGrad 2, a non-autoregressive generative model for text-to-speech synthesis.
WaveGrad 2 is trained to estimate the gradient of the log conditional density of the waveform given a phoneme sequence.
The model takes an input phoneme sequence, and through an iterative refinement process, generates an audio waveform.
This contrasts to the original WaveGrad vocoder which conditions on mel-spectrogram features, generated by a separate model.
The iterative refinement process starts from Gaussian noise, and through a series of refinement steps (e.g., 50 steps), progressively recovers the audio sequence.
WaveGrad 2 offers a natural way to trade-off between inference speed and sample quality, through adjusting the number of refinement steps.
Experiments show that the model can generate high fidelity audio, approaching the performance of a state-of-the-art neural TTS system.
We also report various ablation studies over different model configurations.
Audio samples are available at this https URL.

</td><td>

</td></tr></table>

## 1·Introduction: 引言

<table><tr><td width="50%">

</td><td>

</td></tr></table>

## 2·Related Works: 相关工作

<table><tr><td width="50%">

</td><td>

</td></tr></table>

## 3·Methodology: 方法

<table><tr><td width="50%">

</td><td>

</td></tr></table>

## 4·Experiments: 实验

<table><tr><td width="50%">

</td><td>

</td></tr></table>

## 5·Results: 结果

<table><tr><td width="50%">

</td><td>

</td></tr></table>

## 6·Conclusions: 结论

<table><tr><td width="50%">

</td><td>

</td></tr></table>
