# Avocodo

<details>
<summary>基本信息</summary>

- 标题: "Avocodo: Generative Adversarial Network for Artifact-free Vocoder"
- 作者:
  - 01 Taejun Bak,
  - 02 Junmo Lee,
  - 03 Hanbin Bae,
  - 04 Jinhyeok Yang,
  - 05 Jae-Sung Bae,
  - 06 Young-Sun Joo
- 链接:
  - [ArXiv](https://arxiv.org/abs/2206.13404)
  - [Publication]() AAAI 2023
  - [Github]()
  - [Demo]()
- 文件:
  - [ArXiv]()
  - [Publication] #TODO

</details>

## Abstract: 摘要

<table><tr><td width="50%">

Neural vocoders based on the generative adversarial neural network (GAN) have been widely used due to their fast inference speed and lightweight networks while generating high-quality speech waveforms.
Since the perceptually important speech components are primarily concentrated in the low-frequency bands, most GAN-based vocoders perform multi-scale analysis that evaluates downsampled speech waveforms.
This multi-scale analysis helps the generator improve speech intelligibility.
However, in preliminary experiments, we discovered that the multi-scale analysis which focuses on the low-frequency bands causes unintended artifacts, e.g., aliasing and imaging artifacts, which degrade the synthesized speech waveform quality.
Therefore, in this paper, we investigate the relationship between these artifacts and GAN-based vocoders and propose a GAN-based vocoder, called Avocodo, that allows the synthesis of high-fidelity speech with reduced artifacts.
We introduce two kinds of discriminators to evaluate speech waveforms in various perspectives: a collaborative multi-band discriminator and a sub-band discriminator.
We also utilize a pseudo quadrature mirror filter bank to obtain downsampled multi-band speech waveforms while avoiding aliasing.
According to experimental results, Avocodo outperforms baseline GAN-based vocoders, both objectively and subjectively, while reproducing speech with fewer artifacts.

</td><td>

</td></tr></table>

## 1·Introduction: 引言

<table><tr><td width="50%">

</td><td>

</td></tr></table>

## 2·Related Works: 相关工作

<table><tr><td width="50%">

</td><td>

</td></tr></table>

## 3·Methodology: 方法

<table><tr><td width="50%">

</td><td>

</td></tr></table>

## 4·Experiments: 实验

<table><tr><td width="50%">

</td><td>

</td></tr></table>

## 5·Results: 结果

<table><tr><td width="50%">

</td><td>

</td></tr></table>

## 6·Conclusions: 结论

<table><tr><td width="50%">

</td><td>

</td></tr></table>
